well I hope we are all healthy and I
hope we will all remain healthy for the
indefinite future but that hope is a
little bit unrealistic and so I've got a
second backup hope the second backup
hope is that insofar as we have health
problems we will have good medicines to
take care of them
medicines are very cheap to produce and
they're very effective much more
pleasant actually than the alternatives
hospitalization operations emergency
rooms the morgue none of these are good
things so we should be very grateful
that we have pharmacologists around
people who research these things and
develop new medicines and we should be
grateful that we have a pharmaceutical
industry that supports their activities
but there is a problem and you can tell
from the fact that the pharmaceutical
industry isn't well-loved in fact in
terms of popularity they rank just about
with the tobacco companies and the arms
manufacturers so that's the problem that
I want to talk with you about today how
would you organize the pharmaceutical
industry if we did it all over again how
would you do it I think we would think
of three main principles the first one
is we want patients to have access to
all the important medicines remember
these things are very cheap to produce
so everybody in the world should have
access to all the important medicines
secondly we want innovative activities
the research and development that
pharmaceutical companies do to track the
diseases that are the most important the
most damaging we want them to aim for
the greatest health impact and thirdly
we want the whole system to be efficient
we want as little of the money that goes
into the system to go to waste
to go for overhead for red tape and so
on and so forth very simple three points
now what about the existing system I
think it does poorly on all these three
counts first universal access forget
about it the vast majority of human
beings do not have access to medicines
at least while they are still on
a patent the their extremely high
markups and that's the problem the
problem is that even though these
medicines are very cheap to produce they
cost a great amount of money during the
time that they are under patent and the
reason for that is that rich people can
pay a lot of money
pharmaceutical companies have a
temporary monopoly they price for the
rich they forget about the poor the
second problem is innovation again we
don't focus on the diseases that do the
most damage and that's often put into
the phrase of the 10/90 gap 10% of all
the money spent on pharmaceutical
research is focusing on diseases that
account for 90% of the global burden of
disease and vice-versa 90% of the money
is spent on diseases that account for
only 10% of the global burden of disease
so there's a huge mismatch between where
we spent the research money and where
the greatest problems are now both these
problems the problem with innovation and
the problem that access have to do with
this the distribution of money in the
world it's extremely unequal the blue
area here is the top quarter of the
human population they have more than
ninety percent of global household
income the bottom half of humanity on
the other hand has not even three
percent of global household income so if
you have pharmaceutical company and you
look for profit opportunities you look
at this sort of chart and you say well
where's the money what am I going to
research whom am I going to provide with
medicines and again that is in the
context of there being only one way in
which the suitable companies make money
under the present system that is through
patent-protected markups that's how they
make their money through markups and if
you make money through markups then
obviously you will go to where the
people have the most income now in terms
of overall efficiency the system also
does very very poorly a lot of money
goes for lobbying politicians in order
to extend patent periods to evergreen as
it's called data exclusivity and so on a
lot of money goes for gaming
we're brand camp name companies are
paying generic companies to delay entry
for example a lot of money goes to take
our patents and all the different
jurisdictions money goes even larger
amounts for litigation they're
litigating endlessly brand name company
against brand name company brand name
company against generic company enormous
amounts go there people say
pharmaceutical companies make a lot of
profit but yes and no they do but a lot
of it goes to these wasteful activities
deadweight losses I won't even tell you
what they are because it's too
complicated but there's also wasteful
marketing a lot of the money that
pharmaceutical companies make goes into
advertising campaigns trying to win
favor with doctors trying to persuade
patients to try this medicine and these
marketing battles of course are pure
waste because what one company spends to
get patients over to their drug another
company spends to win them back and then
there's counterfeiting in the developing
countries a lot of the drugs they're
often more than 50% of what's sold are
counterfeit drugs where people say
because the drug is so expensive I can
offer you a cheaper version but of
course it's not the real thing it's
either deputed or it's completely inert
so on the whole all the money that is
spent on pharmaceuticals and it's
roughly a trillion dollars now per annum
much of that money is absolutely going
to waste it's not going to where it
should be going namely to the
development of new medicines and to the
manufacturing of ones that we already
have now many people think that the
solution to the problem is moral
pressure on pharmaceutical companies and
sure pharmaceutical companies have moral
obligations just like we do when we have
to make a choice often between having a
little extra money and saving a human
life we often feel that we have a duty
to spend the money and save the life and
why should pharmaceutical companies be
any different but really it isn't
realistic to expect from a suitable
companies to act as well as you or maybe
I might act and the reason is threefold
one is that pharmaceutical companies are
bound to their shareholders executive of
such a company wouldn't last very long
if he gave a lot of money
or she for good purposes and thereby
lost money for the shareholders they
would be replaced also pharmaceutical
companies stand in fierce competition
with one another and if you do more if
you are nicer than the other company
sooner or later you'll be driven out of
the market you will not survive the
other company will gain market share and
finally remember the entire industry is
dependent for its income on one thing
and one thing only markups and
ultimately you have to be sustainable if
you spend a lot of money on helping poor
people and you don't get paid for it you
lose this money you cannot continue with
your innovative activities so for these
reasons it's just unrealistic to expect
that pharmaceutical companies will solve
the problem on moral grounds who then
should solve the problem I suggest it
has to be us we citizens and politicians
have to do better in terms of regulating
the pharmaceutical industry focusing
them giving them the right incentives
focusing them on the problems that
really matter the potential gains here
are enormous about one-third of all
deaths each day each year are due to the
diseases of property in the developing
world 50,000 people every day die
prematurely from these diseases and
that's not even counting all the
diseases that we know only too well in
the rich countries cancer heart disease
and so on where again poor people die
often much earlier because they don't
have good medical care including good
medicines and even in which countries
many patients are not getting the best
medicine that sometimes due to the fact
that insurance companies won't cover it
because the price is so absolutely
ridiculous and it's also do sometimes to
the fact that doctors and patients are
falsely influenced by advertising
campaigns or pharmaceutical companies so
what can we do how can we change the
system I want to show you a way in which
we can better incentivize pharmaceutical
innovation and the provision with
medicines to poor people and rich
like and that is the health impact fund
the health impact fund is basically
opening up the second track which
pharmaceuticals can be rewarded for
their activities they have a choice they
can either go over the old system with
patent-protected markups or they can go
the system being rewarded on the basis
of the health impact of the medicines
that they develop and with each
particular medicine they have that
choice
so they can be partly on one track
partly on the other with different
products now how would the health impact
fund work there would be a fixed reward
pool every year we start with maybe six
billion dollars but it could eventually
be revved up remember that the total
money that the world spends on
pharmaceuticals is a trillion so it's a
thousand billion six billion is a drop
in the bucket is relatively small but it
would work with 6 billion and we'd get a
lot of bang for the buck if we
introduced the health impact fund with
just six billion dollars any registered
product if you have a product and you
want to register it with the health
impact fund you will be rewarded for a
period of 10 years during these 10 years
you get a share of these annual reward
pools and that share would be
proportional to your share of the health
impact achieved by all these registered
products so if you product accounts for
8 percent of the health impact of all
the registered products you get 8
percent of the reward money that year
that repeats for 10 years and at the end
of the 10 years your product goes
generic so you basically lose any
further income from it each year the
health impact from your product would be
evaluated and you would be paid on that
basis now if you take that reward from
the health impact fund you can't claim
the other reward you can't mark up the
price you have to sell it cost what does
that mean well it doesn't mean that the
pharmaceutical company tells us what
their cost is but rather a preferred way
of determining what the real cost is of
making a medicine of manufacturing it is
to ask the registrant to put the
production of the medicine out for
tender let generic companies compete for
the production and then the innovator
would buy the product from the cheapest
supplier and would sell it at that same
lowest possible price to patients so the
innovator would make no money at all on
selling the product but would make all
its money from the health impact rewards
now how do we assess the impact of the
introduction of a medicine
well we assess it relative to the
preceding state-of-the-art
so some people before the medicine came
along had no treatment at all now for
the first time they've treatment because
it's cheap people can afford it so here
the impact is the difference between
being treated and not being treated in
other cases the new product is better
than the old products and so a person
gets switched over to a better product
and we pay for the impact for the
difference that the new product makes if
you have a product on the health impact
fund and you simply switch somebody from
an existing product to another product
to your product and it's no better you
get no money that's in stark contrast to
the existing system where you get a lot
of money for switching someone on one
product to an equip product that is your
product the health impact fund does not
pay for that we quantify health impact
in terms of quality adjusted life years
that met has been around for about 20
years and it's very easy to explain just
think of a human life as a kind of plank
it's 80 inches long one inch high and
when you die prematurely before you
reach 80 well the plank is a little
shorter and if you are sick during the
time that you live the plank is a little
bit thinner and what diseases can nibble
away well that medicines can restore our
medicines can avert the taking away of
these parts and they get paid for that
that's the method basically now we look
of course each year we have to assess we
have to spend a considerable amount of
money looking at how these various
medicines that are registered to the
health impact fund are doing in the
various countries and here statistics is
scream be helpful you all know how exit
polling works and this is a similar
method you look for a statistically
significant sample you look for a sample
and then try to figure out what the
health impact of the medicine is in
different locations in different
demographic groups and of course you
look very carefully at the actual world
this is in contrast to how medicines are
today rewarded sometimes there is a
reward based on performance but it's the
performance in clinical trials in the
laboratory if you like and not the
performance in the real world the health
impact fund would look at real world
impact it would look not just at the
quality of a drug but also at how widely
it is distributed whether the innovator
manages to target those patients who can
benefit the most
and also how well the drug is used in
the field so innovators would have much
stronger incentives than they do now to
make sure that every patient who takes
the drug knows exactly how to take it to
optimal effect today most package
inserts are not even translated into
local languages and so it's not
surprising that patients don't make the
best use of the product now how would
the financing work basically the health
impact fund as I said could start with
something like 6 billion dollars it's
not nothing but it's also not a lot of
money compared to what the world is
already spending on pharmaceuticals so
the best way to think of it is as a new
way of paying for what we are already
paying for in any new medicines you pay
with one hand through the tech system
but you get something back with the
other hand because you also get these
medicines for cheap this is not just for
poor people everybody will have these
health impact fund registered medicines
at cost at a very low price now one
important hurdle here politically is
that we have to make sure that we have
long-term visibility for innovators that
innovators know that the money is
actually there and so we need
governments to fund the health impact
fund because only governments can make
predictable commitments for a long
period of time
because the health impact fund
registration is voluntary you basically
have a self-adjusting reward rate as the
rate rises to high innovators will come
in and drive the write down conversely
if the rate falls too low innovators
will be reluctant to register and the
rate will recover so the rate will
always be at a reasonable level the
health impact fund is beneficial for all
parties benefits innovators by giving
them a new market and most importantly
by overcoming their public relations
problems that we started with it
benefits patients because patients are
much more likely to get the right
medicine and also for these medicines to
be developed the medicines that we most
need and it also benefits governments or
tax payers if you like because it
creates a permanent source of
pharmaceutical innovation that will be
here for all future times it's a kind of
machine that always directs
pharmaceutical innovation to where we
have the greatest problems maybe for
diseases that don't even exist yet the
health impact fund will always channel
innovation in the direction where it's
most needed
now we have a little bit of help already
you can see here the number of people
who have agreed to help us but we want
your help as well we want you to join us
maybe to talk with your government to
help us with publicity to help us with
your ideas in perfecting the health
impact fund scheme and what we most
urgently need for the moment is to start
a pilot the pilot would introduce one
medicine into one jurisdiction on the
health impact fund model the innovator
would get paid according to the cost of
the medicine for the sales and would
then get additional money on the basis
of the health impact here we need
funding for the rewards funding for the
assessment and in particular we need
political support to get politicians to
support a pilot of that sort if you have
any further questions don't hesitate
to write us and contact us at this
address thank you very much
[Applause]